.........................................Table Of Contents...............................................................
1. changelog <URL:#tn=1. changelog>
	1.1 Conquest of Elysium 3 Changelog 23hours 24mins ago - Full VERSION: 3.03 <URL:#tn=	1.1 Conquest of Elysium 3 Changelog 23hours 24mins ago - Full VERSION: 3.03>
	1.2 <URL:#tn=	1.2>
2.  <URL:#tn=2. >
.................................................END TOC..............................................

1. changelog

	1.1 Conquest of Elysium 3 Changelog 23hours 24mins ago - Full VERSION: 3.03
GAME
'f' changed to remove fast units.
's' and 'f' can now be used to both select and deselect.
's' changed to remove slow units.
+/- to select/deselect 10 unit of a specific type at once.
2 new random events.
Archmage citadel got extended vision.
Barabarian can create Totem poles.
Barbarian starts with a random totem pole.
Boar Warrior and Werebear are unique reqruitments, Epona cavalry is not.
Daughter of Dvalin now pops 3 dwarves per months.
Demilich.
Deserted town could not be sieged, fixed.
Dots showing AP left were not always correct, fixed.
Dragon did not cost gold, fixed.
Dwarf costs adjusted
Dwarf income penalty was incorrect, fixed
Effigy.
Ettin replaced both weapons with one magic weapon, fixed.
Experienced Retiarius got disease causing net attack, fixed.
F5 to view score graphs (if enabled) during 'Conan is playing' in network play.
Game Over reveals score graphs and map.
Ghoul claw replication power printed in weapon info.
Hellhound can no longer bite and breathe at the same time.
Income overview shows modified income per terrain type too.
It is now possible to plant Shadow Trees in cannibal villages.
Less bright player colors.
Longdead triarius didn't have a long pike, fixed.
Mages will no longer cast fire resistance on fire elementals and similar.
Manflayer is now fast.
Manticore flick barb had wrong sound effect, fixed.
Meteor crash site is now revealed to the entire world.
Mind Slime Horror had broken confusion, fixed.
Mindless beings can no longer get mental afflictions.
Mound king can start with magic items.
Mounted Ancestral Barbarians are now fast.
Mounted scout for barbarian.
Mummy has an equipable touch of the dead.
Necromancer sensed dead animals too, which does not correspond with what can be raised, fixed.
New Hero messages has a goto commander button.
New ability: Non magical invulnerability.
No terrain popup when mouse is inside income or commander box.
Not possible to make druid major summon in brigand lair, fixed.
One new spiritism spell.
Optional score graphs.
Performance improvements, especially for large maps.
Player out messages will say who defeated the player.
Reanimated target didn't always follow reanimator automatically (bolt of unlife, doppelgangers), fixed.
Rune Smith now requires dwarves of appropriate type to create elite dwarves. No more force growing from the Dvala, so she no longer needs to be present.
Season show on network wait screen.
Shortcuts for necromancer powers.
Single player games no longer have a 'Conan's turn' message before every turn (old games are not affected).
Some new or altered sprites.
Some shortcuts changed so they can work from map screen too.
Some stat changes.
Sound effect for vampire transformation.
There was a small chance for a stop/junk sprite to appear in mountains, fixed.
Troll forests can now be burned down.
Updated manual
Vampire could not upgrade, fixed.
Watchtower sightings not updated correctly to allies in network game, fixed.
Year shown in season popup.
You now get to play one turn after defeat when using --battlereports in order to see the last battles.
MAPS
Map commands: Player -1 on events used for the player that triggered the event.
MODDING
Very limited modding support is now available.
TECHNICAL
All textures loaded on demand.
Bad default TEMP directory on Windows if environment variable is not set, fixed.
Command line switches are now passed through the Desura start script on Linux.
Faster scroll wheel zoom speed.
Improved file name sanitation.
Map editor map size incorrectly limited to 127, fixed.
Portals could cause game to crash during AI movement, fixed.
Removed flicker when moving with keyboard.
Sound system shut down properly on exit now.
Typos fixed.

	1.2
2. 
